Atlas of AI, the 2021 book by Kate Crawford explores the impact of artificial intelligence on society, politics, and the environment. In this, Crawford provides a critical examination of AI’s development and deployment, shedding light on the technology’s hidden costs and consequences. I found the story at the beginning, about Hans, the clever horse to be particularly interesting, and especially how it’s used as a cautionary tale in the world of machine learning. I absolutely agree with the point that today’s AI systems and the huge LLMs powering them can provide terrible predictions, and moreover, the people programming these systems are themselves not fully aware on how certain results are generated at times.

Crawford discusses the power dynamics at play in the AI industry and the influence of large tech companies in shaping the direction of AI research and applications. She also delves into the ethical and societal implications of AI, including issues related to bias, surveillance and control. Reading the first few pages instantly made me connect this with one of our initial readings, Program or Be Programmed.

She further moves on to highlight the environmental consequences of AI, such as its substantial energy consumption and contribution to climate change. Crawford argues that AI is not a purely virtual or abstract concept, but has concrete real-world effects that need to be considered. In relation to this, I found “I argue that AI is neither artificial nor intelligent. Rather, artificial intelligence is both embodied and material, made from natural resources, fuel, human labor, infrastructures, logistics, histories, and classifications.” to be one of her quotes that succinctly captures the essence of the whole reading.

Crawford proceeds to offer a comprehensive and critical perspective on the broader impact of AI technologies, raising important questions about their implications on the planet. She states that the book is supposed to be an atlas that provides “an expanded view of AI as an extractive industry”. She concludes the introduction by providing a brief “journey map” of places in the world that AI has impacted, and how its development encompasses diverse issues like labor, politics, privacy, infrastructure, capital, and power.

New Extractivism, the visual essay by Vladan Joler introduces the various layers of the superstructures that underly new extractivist practices. The numerous allegories presented, each explore a different theoretical concept related to the topics of power, control, digital labor, colonialism, and exploitation of nature. Joler has termed termed his work as an “assemblage of concepts and allegories”.

With Joler’s work being built upon research and maps provided by Kate Crawford, I found these two texts having some similarities. They both tackle the notion that in the 21st century, artificial intelligence isn’t an abstract concept, but rather, has major implications on the planet’s resources, while also encompassing societal, political, and cultural issues.

I also feel that both their works surround the big tech companies of today and how they all massively exploit human labor and privacy, with Crawford focusing more on AI organizations, whereas Vladan “name-dropped” Google, Amazon, and Facebook in his video.

Slightly unrelated, but on watching Vladan’s video, I couldn’t help but conjure up major similarities or connections to the 2020 Netflix documentary called The Social Dilemma. It dives into the psychological underpinnings and the manipulation techniques by which social media & technology companies, specifically Facebook & Instagram, addict users. People's online activity is watched, tracked, and measured by these companies, who then use this data to build AI models that predict the actions of their users, and/or sell their data for monetization purposes. Over the course of the 17-minute video, I felt that the concepts explored seemed to resonate what the Netflix documentary had showcased.